We just experienced for
the first time people, our DOM, our model,
a list of elements in C++ in just a list,
just like a job list in C++,
that allows us to display
content on that web page.
So here we go, and there's our web page,
and I'm gonna draw in blue our list in
JavaScript, our model in C++.
Soon it will be in JavaScript, hopefully,
and so we'll see, but there it is.
This is going to be our list.
Now technically, we know it's an object
data type, but just for our purposes for
thinking like is an ordered
list down the page,
everything is added to here
will show up on this webpage.
Here's our webpage and we get to write in,
The beautiful language of HTML,
we get to write code
instructions that add things
directly to a C++ list of elements.
That's kind of amazing.
And those are then auto-displayed,
rendered through the layout and
render engine.
The layout part is going to analyze
exactly how to place the elements
that we list out on this
particular web browser's view,
particular web browser's screen,
particular device, and
then the pixels are gonna be
determined by the render engine.
Actually, by the way, side note, the
output of the render engine is gonna be
an image, a bitmap image of that
particular view, that screen pinged out to
the graphics card every, I don't know,
16 milliseconds, 60 times a second.
Isn't that wild?
This altogether is known as WebCore.
This is the core set of technologies
that do the job of storing a list
of elements in C++ to be
loaded on the webpage, and
then converting that
list into actual pixels.
We do not get to write well we'll see
the C++, why don't if I want to I get to
write the beautiful HTML which allows me
to list stuff down the page in order.
Think about how intuitive that is.
I wanna add some text to the page,
I write the text.
I then wanna add a box below it.
I get to write the name of that box
in the line below in my text file.
Don't ever underestimate how thought free
design that is, so let's get into it.
Line one of our HTML people literally, you
think you are coming to the hard parts of
user interface engineering
to walk through some HTML.
Here we go.
Line one, why?
What are we doing in
our first line of HTML?
What are we adding to our
DOM in our first line,
>> Putting up some text.
>> So we've got what's on your mind,
that's gonna add to our list of elements,
the text as our first element,
what's on your mind.
Beautiful, there it is.
And that's then going to
automatically display what,
if I wrote is one more time,
what's on your mind on,
on the page, isn't that beautiful?
There it is.
Our next panelist is going to add what,
Phil?
>> Gonna add an input.
>> Yeah.
Input element.
Yeah, they often call them on the DOM,
the list of C++ elements.
They often call it a node,
node on the DOM, but
it is you can sort of think of
this as an element, an element and
an element on the page,
an element in an HTML code.
They often call these HTML tags.
I would not call these then tags,
these become kind of nodes.
I think the term element works
kind of the whole way across.
Yeah input,
that's gonna add an input element.
I'm actually gonna literally show them
as well as bullet points kinda of
listed down.
And there it is, my input field,
that's not very nicely drawn.
And then, I get to add and
this is where we get to
see our next elegantly
designed feature of HTML.
I love all of these people in this room
have been explicitly, I've been told,
are mid to senior level engineers.
And every one of you is like [LAUGH],
how did we get punished with this?
But everything else we're gonna do,
people in hard part is going
to carry back to this goal.
Everything else we do in UI hardware
is going to try to make it as intuitive
as this.
So, there it is, a button,
and look at this.
If I wanted to have.
So let's produce a button, okay?
That makes sense.
If I wanted to have some text inside
of a button on a screen visually,
that's my output is going to be
a button with text inside of it.
How would I write,
how would I design my programming language
when the primitives designer to make
it as intuitive as possible to have
text inside of something on the screen.
While I have it that I write
the text inside of button, and
there it is we let it know that the button
is ending with a little forward slash,
but I have text inside of a button.
And so on my model of the page,
I will have a button added,
and then almost like a sort of nested,
like a sub element,
our text of publish, and
then that will create, publish.
Or think like a sort of sub element or if
you were thinking about it's in an array,
this is where a list it would be a sub
array within the existing array.
If it were an object, you imagine sort
of be a sub object reference from within
an existing object, and that then
shows up on the page accordingly.
Now, what about on that same note
if he wanted to divide up the page
into some areas to make it easier
to think about its structure, and
not just have one giant list
of elements on the page?
What if we could sort of cluster
elements into subdivisions on the page.
Maybe we can think about this
as a subdivision of the page,
that page has got longer here.
We can think of it as
a subdivision of the page.
Into that,
we could place some other elements.
How would we do that?
Well, just like above.
We get to place inside of other elements,
in this case a division,
physically on our HTML code,
in our text file, three elements,
and they're gonna show up inside
of that division on the page.
Now, we're not gonna be able to see this
division until we put content in it.
It doesn't automatically have any
border or anything like that, so
you won't be able to see it,
but it's there on the page.
And on our list of elements on the page,
it is also there.
So we add our division.
I mean, by the way,
the names of these in the C++
implementation in this list may or may not
correspond directly to the almost commands
to create them from our HTML file.
So well what are we
adding in the next line?
Let's have Matic, what are we adding
in the next line inside our division?
>> Video tag?
>> Video, so well let me think,
what am I adding on the DOM, Matic.
>> Another video.
[CROSSTALK]
>> Element or node, or exactly,
a sort of sub-element,
a video node with what information.
Well, where we'll find it,
which by the looks of it,
is gonna be on our own machine,
on our own computer.
And it looks like it's
gonna be a very interesting
video of carpool karaoke outdoor, and
there it is added to the list
of elements with the URL.
There it is, with the link to it,
sorry, the exact link.
And then we can add, exactly,
we can add some further text in P for
paragraph.
There it is, P paragraph.
Paragraph and that's going to have
some text of firstly love Les Mis.
My goodness, this is incredibly safe.
[LAUGH] And that actually should
be a bit further across and
these are sub-elements of this division.
So these are sub-elements
of the division here, and
we have another paragraph,
and this one says part 7.
And there it is and
then that's the end of our division and
that will show up on our page.
I haven't homemakers have made
this difficult for myself but
there it is and then love Lame Mis and
then heart seven People,
we have never had a more elegant solution.
We have a list of elements in C++ that
we get to add to by just listing out,
in text format, what we want to
have added to that list in C++.
And then rely on built-in technology and
web core that's gonna convert that list
into actual elements on the webpage.
What more could we ask for, people?
We're gonna come to thumbs in a second.
But here it is, solution.
An ordered list technically is
an object of page document,
technical term for the web page,
elements that we can add to using HTML.
The order and structure is set by
where we write each line of HTML, and
that is such a blessing.
The layout engine then works out
the exact structure given the pixels or
given the device type.
And then the render engine
produces a composite image,
joins up all these elements, puts it
into a literally a bitmap, rasterize it
turns it into a list of pixels, and
then pings it out 60 times a second.
That's it for the graphics card people.
That's my beautiful page.
>> [LAUGH]
>> That's it, people.
So we are blessed to have had
this semi-visual code for
structure and content.
Semi visual, I'm calling it.
We have our HTML code, and
it produces a semi visual Sorry,
the HTML is semi-visual.
It produces a model of the page that then
gets displayed on the actual pixels.
We get to create an element,
add its content like the seven,
like the heart seven.
There it is, heart seven.
We get to, what was that goal number one?
Display content, and
we've done it, and it's visual.
We get to create the element.
We get to add its content,
where to add it is determined by
where it is on the HTML file itself.
Look at that.
For right inside of the division is our
video, our paragraph and our paragraph,
and right inside the division is that
video, a paragraph and a paragraph.
We have essentially built
out semi-visual code for
our structure and content of our page.
We're very lucky.
Let's have thumbs.
You lost me, I'm clear,
I have clarifications.
I'd love to see some clarifications.
Ian's thumbs are clear, yeah,
Phil's got a clarification potentially.
And why did you have one as well?
Why don't we start with wise?
>> Yeah, mine was just going back to the
layout engine versus the render engine,
something I've not worked
with too much at that level.
The render engine is what literally,
like, makes the bitmap.
>> Correct?
Yeah, exactly.
The layout engine is going to work out.
How should we position if we
were to shrink the window.
And now, what's on your mind is
going to wrap its text around.
How is that going to affect
the layout of the page?
>> If not topical, totally cool, but
my understanding is the render engine is
like a large chunk of the browser's and
one of the reasons why we have so
few of them is that Accurate.
>> Interesting.
>> That also like
Here Be Dragons code inside of-
>> I mean for sure.
And that is profoundly sophisticated to
deal with that also across all different
device types.
And when you're dealing with an amount
of legacy ways that you can affect
what is displayed, I guess,
paper over cracks historically
that have not all been, all while
you're dealing with legacy browsers
that have not paper over those cracks.
So yeah, the render engines, as you say,
the main render engines are all
spinning off from versions
from like 10 years,
15 years ago, and they are not.
People are not building out these
render engines from scratch.
And really, I think only,
as you say, a small consortium
of producers are actually
creating these browsers.
Because it is such, we essentially
built almost a full operating system
within an application that was
designed to display text and links.
And has to work across all devices.
It's quite remarkable.
Mark, there was a question
from the audience?
>> When you rendered that
text node at the top,
would that actual,
would there be an actual node around it?
>> Yeah, absolutely.
So we'd actually have here,
it would be something,
I should have actually done that, that was
a mistake, it would say something like,
you know, text and
then there would be what's on your mind.
In practice people, exactly how these
are implemented, we can go and look in
the code of the web browser's engine and
to be honest, how do we do this nowadays?
Am I meant to say this?
We go and search in a good old
friend that gives us exact lines
of code from any library or technology.
We do to go and check it every time
otherwise it will tell us completely wrong
thing, but our friend ChatGPT gives
us the exact implementation of
the class that produces a text node in
the DOM in C++ and gives us an object
within the larger object model that can
store text to be displayed on the page.
>> Was the forgiving
nature of HTML by design?
There was valid HTML and invalid HTML at
one point, but the browser never throws.
>> That's an interesting question,
is the forgiving nature of HTML by design.
Such that we don't have any sense,
an error handling process or
an error recording history.
[SOUND] Let me think about it.
For me, it speaks to the fact that HTML,
forgiving is a good word for it,
is incredibly intuitive way of
displaying content on a page.
However, there is probably
a reason why we, well,
we're gonna see there's a very profound
reason why we do not use it for
our many of our,
much of our application building.
And we have to move away from it
to even achieve our solution to of
making interactive applications
that would imply maybe this HTML
that I'm almost saying here is
almost like a runtime, it ain't.
Even though we go through it line
by line and produce elements,
we're gonna see that's a one-time thing.
So yes, you could certainly imagine
error handling at that moment to
identify failures, things that could
not actually be added to the page.
But also at the same time, it's indicative
of the extent to which HTML is a minimal
minimized like a minimal language that
only allows displaying of content.
Sorry only allows adding elements
to a C++ list and that's it.
We're gonna see everything you think that
is HTML when elements get created or
not, none of that is HTML.
HTML is a one time list.
It'd be like that yeah, it's just
literally like, you know, writing a list
of elements and then saying, hey,
super boss, can you add those?
You could totally imagine error handling
stays at that point that says, no,
you can't add that, but
on the flip side also,
it's kind of indicative of
how minimal that process is.
It's here's a list of elements,
add them to the C++ list, that's it.
So in that sense, anything like error
handling, these will all be quite
significant additions,
where would that error even be displayed?
I'm not entirely sure,
there's no like dev tools.
Looking at the HTML execution, maybe
you could imagine like a parser of your
HTML before it's loaded into the browser.
That could spot syntax failings, but
there's not a runtime
that's executing that code.
So I don't even know where
the error would be displayed.
It could be the console, I guess, but
the console is rendering errors as called
from JavaScript, where you are actually
saying please use the console.
So you can see what I mean?
It's like it's not clear to me
where it would even be displayed,
because it is such a minimal but
beautiful for it language.